Share with me any recollections you have and or any
thoughts you think Dr. Williams would have had
about some of these special people. Ed Cooper, who
was his assistant for many years. Ed was a good
assistant. He would have thought Ed was a good
assistant. And he would ask him to do anything, I
believe. Do you remember any Cooper stories? Any
stories about Cooper and Things that he and Dr.
Williams... I remember the last thing I heard
about him. What's that? Cut it off. Oh, no. Go
ahead. Go ahead. About something else then. You
know, I told you a while ago about Williams is out
and Jarvis is in. Oh, mm-hmm.
Do you remember any
stories about things that Dr. Williams asked Ed to
do? Any assignments he gave him? I gave him one
early. That was to look after his mother when they
had the musical and the reception down at Bryan.
And when they first came, Ed was the one he asked to
take care of his mother because he and I were in the
receiving line. But Ed evidently just did
anything they asked. And I can't... I wasn't that
close to what Jack was having people do. I was sort
of closed off because I didn't try to be a part of his
work, only when he included me. All right, now, who
do you think were the closest confidants,
trustees of Dr. Williams when he was at A&M? Who did
he trust most when he... listen to or to give an
assignment to? Who would have been the people that
he trusted most? I don't think he would have had one
person singled out. No, no, but who were in the
group? Well, his staff. But which one? I don't
know. He would have asked many more. He would have
just taken everybody. His philosophy was give
that person their job, pick the best person you
can. You've heard this before. Let them do their
job. Now, you probably were closer to who he was
using than I was because he didn't come home and
recount the events of the day. I sometimes
overheard For instance, when we lived here, I
didn't know what he was doing until we went out to
his head of his department for a happy hour, and
Carl would be dying laughing and repeating what he
had found out that Jack was doing. But I wouldn't
have known if I hadn't listened to Carl. He just
didn't come home and say, I did this today or did
that. But like I know that John Calhoun and John
Colas and Ed Cooper... He would have talked to them
if it related to their work. That's when he would
have approached him about what had to be done. But I
don't think, I know he got up and went to people's
office to talk to them. He didn't send for you.
Did he come to your office? A few times, yes, ma'am.
He didn't send for you, though, did he?
Occasionally. Did he? Occasionally. Like that
day on the law school and the medical school. And
when we walked in, he was grinning, and we kind of
like, uh-oh. This one's going to be fun. It was not a
mean grin. It was like, okay. You're here. You're
happy. Happy Jack. Smiling Jack. Now, was he,
where did that nickname begin? Do you know? With
the students, Smiling Jack. Here at Clemson?
Okay. In his Cowboys and Indians course. He taught
the opening of the West, and they called it Cowboys
and Indians. Of the courses he taught, which one do
you, which course or courses do you think he
enjoyed most? Don't have any idea. Okay. Do you
know of any that he taught that he didn't enjoy? No.
What did he like most about teaching? Why did he? I
don't know. I know he was the type of person that
wanted to be a good teacher. When he went off to get
his doctorate, he destroyed all of his lecture
notes. He said, I'm not going to be the kind of
professor that writes one set of lectures and then
uses them forever. And so when he came back, he set a
time limit for himself.
We came back in spring, and he had to do his
research. And then he taught, and he had to write
all those lectures over at the same time he was
writing his dissertation. But I don't think he, he
hadn't realized that was going to happen to him,
but he did it. Now what was his dissertation topic?
Crime and Punishment in the Old South. Okay. I've
been trying to remember the two times that
something excited me till I couldn't go to sleep,
and I can only remember one of them. And it was two
things that he did that excited me, and it
certainly wasn't when we moved on to another job,
but the first one was when the word came that the
University of South Carolina was going to publish
his dissertation. Now that just excited me
because I had lived through every bit of it. But
I've been trying to remember what was the other
thing that was just that exciting something that
pleased him, obviously, something that, but I
can't remember. Now, was he excited about the news
that it was going to be published? He never acted
excited about anything. He'd make a statement and
that was it, and he never, you know, made a big deal
out of anything. And one of the schools, the
colleges or schools in this state used his
dissertation as their textbook as how to write
one. Have you ever seen it? Oh, yes. Who would have
been, if I were to ask him about who his role models
were for good teaching, reckon who he would say?
Who were his models for being a good teacher? I
don't have any idea. I wonder, was Bell Wiley one? I
don't have any idea. Who...
What... administrators were his. Andy Holt? They
were friends. He enjoyed Andy. I don't have any
idea. You know, he did so much for Southern
Association that he had been exposed to an awful
lot of people and Jack was always an officer and
everything that he got near before it was over.
That doesn't sound very nice for me to say, but it
happened. You know, ministering or getting
things done, I think, showed up. Other people
recognized it. Excuse me. He had many, many
stories that he used in his speeches and
everything. And I have made notes about some of
those that I have used over and over again. What do
you think were some of his favorite stories that he
enjoyed telling in his speeches? The only one I
remember was he did quote Thurber. He quoted
Thurber several times.
The Barrel of Bricks story. And that's the only
ones I know. Do you know where the Barrel of Bricks
story came from, where it originated? No, no. But
I've seen him get up and change his introduction.
At Emory & Henry one time, a student got up to speak
before he did. He was being honored that day.
She got up and told a negative story about
something that the students didn't like.
He got up and changed his introduction to quote
Thurber about somebody that got eaten for dinner.
I've forgotten how the story went, but I could see
how quick he could make a change in a story. And I
recognized it, that he got up and changed it
completely to start his speech, just to refer back
with a Thurber story on what he had thought of what
that child did. When he was going to make a formal
speech, These are not just remarks. This is a
formal speech. Did he write it out word for word, or
did he have an outline? He had different ways. He
had note cards. For years, he taught students here
in church. Then he taught the senior class, the
adult class. And he would get his lesson up a week
before time, put it on cards, and then he wouldn't
take the cards out of his pocket. Now, this was at
what church? Methodist. He wouldn't take the
cards out. And I would sit there hoping. But he
says, if you've written it, you know it. And I have
found that to be true. The little speech I was going
to make for the ceremony out there...
After I wrote it, I could have given it without any
notes, and probably I wanted to give Jo something.
I want her to see those pictures of the ceremony so
she can see Dalton.
No, the time... I don't want this on there. Turn it
off. He'd been teaching in the classroom and in the
church, and he always read when he died... He had
given the chairman of his board a book, and the
chairman came out and said, I've read more than he
did because Jack had the same book. And I didn't
say, no, but Jack was reading three books. But he
read all the time, and he had grown up reading, and
he was just that type of a person. He had great
pleasure in it.
Now, he just loved Thurber, all the Thurber
stories. He could relate to those.
But he also read serious things. But he could write
his speeches, and if you'd written your speech,
then you could give it without notes. Do you
remember any time when he
forgot to get a speech ready or he took the wrong
notes? You wouldn't have been with him the time
that he was with the Aggies. I think I've told you
this.
Buck Wires said, Jack, I don't know what you can do.
This is in a gymnasium, and it's a family affair.
People have come and brought their families,
their children here in the audience. And he said it
was the most remarkable thing he had. Buck told me
this person, most remarkable thing I've ever
seen. He got up and gave the lessons of history. He
gave them a history lesson. And he said everybody
was quiet and everybody listened. Now, was that
his delivery? He wouldn't have had any notes. But
you ought to see that book. Now, it's marked up. and
but he'd write to here and then he'd write to page so
and so in a book and you know he could outline it in in
the book and i have them in my fireproof safe now one
of my favorite williams memories also is that
letter from the person in West Texas that said, I
couldn't believe they'd picked you. You're not an
Aggie? You're not an Aggie. And I use that quite
often. I give... But don't tell them that he made it
up now. No, no, no, I don't. I tell them that it is a
story, it is a letter that I heard him quote quite
often. Well, that's what he did. He went to
Buckwires with it, after he composed it, and said,
now this sort of covers that problem. And I thought
it was clever, didn't you? Oh, it always went over
speed. Yeah, it was clever. You've heard it. And
with groups today, I use it quite often to...
You're not an Aggie, but I'll watch you damn close.
And one lady one time, I was standing close enough
to her, and she said, I wonder why he said close.
Instead of closely, you know. And the other one
said, I guess he wrote it, I guess it was written the
way he talked. That's right, that's right. But I
could hear, sometimes you hear things, you know,
if they don't realize that you're, but no, don't
tell me that he composed that to make a point. I
thought it was better than saying I'm not an Aggie,
but I'll do the best I can. That's great. When y'all
traveled, what was his favorite place or places
for y'all to visit for relaxation, other than
visiting family? Were there any favorite
vacation spots?
No, we toured some. We took our children, went to
Canada, took our children and went out to Outer
Banks of North Carolina. We went in to see one of the
out north place they had up there on the coast. You
said Hawaii. He wanted to take me. We never got
there. Oh, you never got there. We never got there.
Disaster struck both times, and Betty was afraid
that I'd never go after Jack died. But they
arranged for Mary for me to go. and share their
facilities. No, he wanted to move there when the
war was over, but he said to me, he said, I just
couldn't do it to your parents. And he never went
back to Saipan after? No, no. He never went back to
Hawaii. But he wanted to live there because he just
loved it because of the weather, because of the
breeze, really. He just loved the fact that if it
rained, the breeze dried you off in a few minutes,
and it was always this wonderful weather. Now, as I
look back at the notes I made, I remember that 1976,
we were looking forward to it on the campus as the
centennial. And all of those great plans were
marred by his heart problems. Were there any
warnings before that heart attack? Sure. Is that
right? They started here. Is that right? He was
misdiagnosed. And the
doctor said it was. hyperglycemia. But Jack had
had trouble for years. And that's the reason, when
we lived in College Station, people didn't know
it. But I did all the grocery shopping. I did our
meals. I wasn't going to let anybody cook for him.
And that got me in trouble with Juanita, who
resented the fact that I couldn't. But I thought
that she liked to make fattening casseroles. And
that wasn't the way I fed my husband. So what foods
did you try to avoid from his diet? Well, just heavy
calories, you know, a balanced diet. Fruit,
vegetables, meat. By this time, I think I'd
stopped frying chicken. Could he, if he wanted to,
privately have a glass of wine or a glass of beer?
Until he got on his medication. When he got on his
medication, it gave him diarrhea. That was after
the heart attack? Uh-huh. And that was an
experimental drug, you know, that he was on. But he
could have a... But he didn't drink. Two drinks
would have knocked him out, I think. He was very
sensitive to alcohol. Now, the heart attack came
in March, right?
It was a holiday weekend. He went up to make an
address at Emory & Henry. It must have been in the
spring because he made an address. He'd already
been to the doctor and college station. And he went
up and made his speech. And then I saw him go in and
take a step around the corner and take a pill,
because they were giving us a tour of the campus.
And then we were supposed to go to see his mother,
and I begged him just to go home. And we got over to
his mother. He said, mother's expecting me. It's
so lucky. Got over there, and we went out to eat
again. And he ordered country ham.
And I was trying my best from the other end of the
table to catch his eye, and I didn't manage, so he
ate another heavy meal. And so when we got back to
his mother's house, I made an excuse and said, we
have to go to bed. We went to bed, and he went to
sleep, and I lay there all night long like this,
with my hand touching his heart. The next morning,
he got up, went down. I said, tell your mother that
Margaret I don't remember where I told her I had a
kidney stone or what, that we might have to leave
suddenly. I was afraid to leave. It was a holiday
weekend. And I knew if we canceled our plane and
tried to get on an early one, we might be out and not
have anything. We got back, and I said, let's go to
the hospital, and we got off the plane in Houston.
He said, no, I've got to go look after my business.
I've got to go Dallas tomorrow or something like
that. So we went to the house, and he called the
doctor, and they said, get down here as fast as you
can. And he went to the office and answered his
mail.
Because he's so like him. And then we drove down
there. And I went back to take care of the dog, as
I've told you before. And on Wednesday, the doctor
called me up and said he's either had a heart
attack. I have the piece of paper where he listed
every time he had a pain and the time and the
duration. And when the doctor came in the next day,
he called me and said, I'm taking him to intensive
care. He's either had a heart attack or he's having
one. But you see what I'm saying is you couldn't
stop him from doing what he thought he needed to do,
and he could have died. Now, did Dr. DeBakey assist
while you all were in Houston? He was on Jack's case
and had every doctor in Houston on the case. That's
what I thought. And he would not let Jack die. He
saved his life, and he operated on him. And
it was a long time before Jack was, you know, was
awake. And when he was awake, he was awake. You
know, it wasn't that he was mentally gone. He was
just unconscious all that time. Because it was a
month or so, wasn't it? It was a good while. It was
years. But when he woke up, it's like John Calhoun,
his great assistant told people not to come to see
him. You know who that was.
Anyway, John Calhoun came over and Jack was
discussing the university business with him.
He went back and said, well, he's just talking
about everything like he did before, and it didn't
seem to have, all that time didn't seem to have
bothered him. There's no brain damage. which was,
you know, the hospital, it seemed to that. But I had
the paper that was written on his condition by one
of the graduate students there at the hospital,
and his whole case was published in one of the
medical magazines or whatever it was. You don't
call them magazines, you call them... One of the
journals? Yeah, a journal. But it was... But I
found out in 1955 about this. When Murray was six
months old that this was a heart condition, but it
was big diagnosed. And when he went to the doctor
over on the campus, he still didn't catch it. When
he went to the dentist with the pain in his jaw, the
dentist didn't catch it. And
Jack could keep going regardless. It's been his
life. Keep going regardless of what it was. If he
hadn't learned it before the Marine Corps, he
would have learned it in the Marine Corps. Now,
I've heard a story that Dr. DeBakey came to you in
the wee hours one morning and asked you to sign some
kind of permission for him to use a special drug or a
special technique. I don't know what I signed. One
night I got a phone call that said
that Dr. DeBakey feels like he should operate
before morning. And they came up. We had all
undressed. Roger was there. We went out in the
hallway of the apartment. Roger Miller. He stayed
with me all that time. Went out in the hallway in
their night clothes because we had opened the two
sofas in the room where the girls and I slept. And
Roger had the bedroom. And so we just all went out
there, and the doctor came up and explained to us.
And he moved to Florida, that doctor. I shouldn't
remember his name, too. I could remember all these
names if I wasn't just yakking like this.
Explained us what they were going to do. And Dr.
DeBakey had gone home to take a nap. And then he
operated. And of course, we sat up the rest of the
night. And then when the phone go off, they had us
come down to his office. And they told us that
everything had been fine. And Dr. DeBakey, after a
little while, said, I've got to get back to my
patient.
And see, they had been friends, though, from the
time Jack was coordinating commissioner because
he arranged for the medical school to have the same
pay from the state with their increase that it cost
the state to train a doctor. And that was part of
Jack's coordinating program, so they had known.
And Jaworski was involved in that scene, too. So
these go back to 66, these friendships. And these
were people you could respect. And so I could see
why they liked Jack. And I think Jack was a
respectable person. Certainly. And they were
too. And I could see why you would
associate yourself with those people. And they
were both leaders in their field.
When did Dr. Williams learn that the board had
decided that they were not going to allow him to
remain as president of the system and of the
university that they were going to recreate the
chancellor job. The morning that it happened? The
morning of what happened? We're muting it all the
time.
That board meeting where they decided that, was
that soon after? Mr. Wells had asked him to write
about Jarvin. He said, I've had a lot of letters on
him. And of course, Jack was pushing Calhoun,
which I told him it wouldn't work. But he went to
work that morning, and they told him. And Jack
said, first thing he did, he went to the telephone
and called me and told me to call the girls. He did
not want them to hear it on the radio or read it in the
paper. He left that group and called me. Then he
went back and asked them, did they have anybody to
run the meeting? And they said no, and he held the
meeting for them. And then at the end of presiding
over their meeting, after they'd just fired him
when he got to work that day, he went back and got up
and said, this is my final meeting. But he also told
them, which Jarvis had to know, that Jarvis was not
qualified. He said, why don't you give him
something to do and let him get some experience?
And, of course, Jarvis knew that because... I'm
trying to think of this man that worked for Jack as
his assistant, the board secretary. Oh, oh. Bob
Cherry. Bob Cherry. You should be telling these
stories. You know all right his name. When Jack
went to College Station first time, Fort Albright
told him to fire Bob Cherry. And Jack said, I
couldn't come out here and start firing people.
And... He learned and he realized later on that Bob
was not loyal. Dr. Williams told me one day that the
biggest mistake he made was not taking that advice
when he first received it. He said he's
ingratiating himself to the board now that I can't
do it. Isn't that saying that he had to put up
with... See, I think Jack was about the most loyal
person to the university that anybody could be.
and to his friends, and he had to tolerate Bob
Cherry. Now, y'all moved over to the board house,
the old Board of Regents house just north of
Sabeasa, a few weeks? No, it was later than that. We
stayed in Preston's house for quite a while until
Jarvis said he needed to entertain. He needed it.
And we were glad to... No, but we also knew now, when
we were in the board house, I'm the person that,
that was my decision. I told them get rid of the rats
and the bugs, that I couldn't live with rats and
bugs, which that was noted for, that I never lived
with anything like that. But since I already knew,
Phil Hoffman. That's the president of the
University of Houston that we couldn't remember.
See what I'm saying? Names come to you when you're
not trying to think of their name. What did you
furnish that board house with? Whose furniture
was that? Mine. So, some that had, well, you took it
out of storage, and some of it had been in storage,
and others... Yeah, uh-huh. And how long were you
all there before the house caught fire? Not very
long, but I don't remember the details of it. Less
than a year, I think. You know, it wasn't because it
was... They had a little trouble in Houston
getting rid of the man that they had felt that was
not capable of doing what needed to be done, and he
was adamant about not leaving. But they had to do it
carefully. Describe the floor plan of the... that
board house upstairs. How many bedrooms were
there and so forth? Upstairs? I don't know. Oh, no,
I'm sorry. Downstairs. Downstairs, yeah.
Describe the downstairs area. What was it? How
many rooms were there? There was an entrance hall
with a, I guess you would say, a living room on one
side and a dining area, something on the other
side. I don't remember, and the bedrooms were...
connected. I had my antique bed in one room and Jack
was in the bed in the other room, the one closest to
the outside wall. So were there two bedrooms,
three bedrooms? Two downstairs and a big dining
room and two, I guess you'd call it almost a double
with the hall splitting the entrance area and two
baths on the first floor and the kitchen. It was
okay to live in. I was very careful about trying to
get the blinds to where you couldn't see through
them since we were living on the street. That was my
only problem was living on the street, you know,
where people could see in.
We talked at lunch about the fire, but to be sure
that we get it recorded, describe the night that
the building caught fire. You were saying that...
Well, I heard this pounding on the door. And I got up
and went to the door, and one of the security
officers from the campus had seen the fire coming
out of the roof. And so he said, I was just ready to
kick the door in. It took me a while to get up and put
on a robe and go to the door. And then Jack got up and
said, I'll move the cars. And he took his, I'm sure
he took his medicine, but I know he took his account
book out of the fireproof safe. And he left. And
then I was left with this gentleman. And he wanted
me to show him where to turn off the electricity.
And I dropped my earring. And until I found my
earring, I didn't budge. And don't you feel that
way about something that you have? But I did pick up
my clothes. And I took them out to the car and
dressed in the car. And we watched the fire people
come and go. And then we went to the motel. and
checked in over there for the night, and a real
sweet thing happened.
We had twin beds, and Jack was in bed, and I was in
one, and I got up and went around the other side of
him, not between the beds, but the other side, got
in bed beside me, and I put my arm around him, and he
said, my heart didn't stop pounding until you put
your arm around me. That's a special one. But you
never forget that, that my putting my arm around
him calmed him down that night because he could
have died. And Jarvis and Bob Cherry were in a car
together that night and drove up and saw us sitting
in our car. And I don't remember what was said or if
anything was said, but I think Jack just moved our
car away from him. The fire started as far as you
know about what time, 2 or 3 o'clock in the morning?
I don't have any idea. What time did he kick the door
in, do you know? No. It wouldn't have occurred to me
to go see what time it was. You might go back and find
from some record someplace else what time it was,
but it wouldn't have occurred to me.